Thank you.
Welcome, Minister and officials.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
It's very good to have you all here.
We have you here for half an hour today, so I'll invite you to make some brief
introductory remarks, and we will hand over to questions from the committee.
Thank you.
Well, good afternoon. Thanks, Mr Chair and the Health Select Committee.
Thanks for your time today to talk
a number of things, but one I think is important
to all of us as a country, and that's mental health.
I don't think I need to introduce too much.
Audrey from the Ministry of Health and Dale from Health New Zealand,
who you've already seen today,
and also officials who I'm ably assisted
by. I think the first thing I'd say is the
government's mental health plan is delivering faster access to
support, more frontline workers, and a better
crisis response. It's really encouraging to see
yesterday's report from the Mental Health and Wellbeing Commission
that showed waiting times are coming down.
The workforce has increased since the government came into office.
We've seen an increased number of people who are in mental
health and addiction workforce education.
And not only that, an increasing diversity of people who
are choosing to work in this field.
And I do want to take my time to acknowledge everyone who does the hard
work at the front line of mental health and addiction services, whether
they be in Health New Zealand or in our community NGO and
Kiwi services as well. Not only did the
report paint a favorable picture around recruitment, but
also waiting times were down,
and access rates had increased as well.
So look, that's a good position to be in to start today's conversation.
To support that momentum, based on significant investment in Budget
'25 and Budget 2026,
we've invested an extra $100 million into three
key areas. Faster access to support
into maternal mental health. That's not only bolstering our
specialist maternal services, but also rolling out
peer support lived experience workers in our maternal mental health
services. They're people who have been there before and will share their
experiences to help young moms struggling at a time
of pregnancy and give them perinatal support.
A better crisis response. We're opening up 20 extra
beds. Currently across the system, on average, we have around
40 physical beds that are in place but have no
funding to open. That's why we've made a significant
investment, $51 million to open 20 beds.
That'll ensure people going through emergency department get timely access
to inpatient support.
And the final thing I'd raise, Mr Chair,
before I pause is the investment, $28 million
into the psychology assistant role. I'm really excited about that.
We've worked hard in government on that new registration.
It's actually one of the first new health registrations in over
a decade, investing for over
150 FTE at the frontline of mental health
services. Really excited. Those students are starting in
semester two at AUT and University of Canterbury,
and they'll be in the workforce a year later. Thank you.
Over to you, Mr Chair and the committee.
Thank you, Minister. First question, Tracey Martin, and then I'll come to Parewani.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank you, Minister. Thank you for that update.
I've got a couple of questions relating to what you've just said-
Cool
... but I want to go somewhere different to kick off.
The Ombudsman has warned that people with complex mental health
issues and intellectual disability are ending up in prison,
because suitable specialist placements are not available.
Excuse me.
Know that the Mason Clinic-
Mm-hmm.
Is that from this morning's discussion with the Ombudsman?
No.
You sure?
I wasn't here-
Okay
... so I don't know what discussion you had. That's correct. Sorry.
I just need-- We need to be careful here because there was a discussion from the
Ombudsman which did state some things private to the-
Oh, yes
... private.
Sorry, Mr Chair. I wasn't privy to your discussions.
I'm talking about my own information here.
Okay.
But the Mason Clinic funding is intact contingency, as you know.
But it enables, well, funds enabling work rather than new
beds.
So can you talk us through any kind of additional...
It's a real gap when you talk about mental health.
At the moment, we are essentially incarcerating people that the health system
should be seeing because the health system isn't seeing them.
And I just want to hear your thoughts on that and what-
Sure
... Budget 2026 hasn't done anything to address that gap.
But I want to know where your thoughts are landing
on what you will do next to address that gap.
Yeah, look, thank you for that question.
And it is an important question around how we ensure
better forensic mental health support.
If you look at Budget '25, we invested $51
million into opening up 10 new forensic beds
and eight step-down beds in the Waikato.
But it's also about building out the continuum, so that was funding more
prison in-reach,
FTE, as well as court liaison. We've continued that program
of work in Budget '26 with an extra $36
million.
Is that new capacity though? New beds
Yes. So that will be four new beds as well as
new step-down beds, new prison in-reach services,
and new court liaison services as well.
Where I would say, though, is the crossover around intellectual
disability and forensic, which comes under the
responsibility of Louise Upston with Whaikaha.
But Health New Zealand is contracted to deliver those
beds. There is real pressure across the whole of our forensic system,
including ID as well, and that's why we've got a program
business case in front of Cabinet to look at the long-term planning
of ID forensic services. We know there is a good mix
of not only Health New Zealand services, but also our NGO
and community services who provide that level of care as well.
But at the moment, there's at least 30 to 50 people at any one point in
time, in a prison system who-
Mm-hmm
... but for the failings of the health system wouldn't be
there.
Do you agree that that's a problem?
And are you committed to finding a solution?
I just need clarification because you're sort of going back
between intellectual disability and forensic.
Forensic.
So you're talking forensic mental health-
Mm
... services. Well, that's the reality of the waiting list that
we inherited when we came into office in late 2023.
So that's why we did the work in our first year, and in Budget '25
announced $51 million. But I'd just point to you, $51
million in Budget '25
for 10 new forensic inpatient beds, and
eight new step-down beds in the community.
They are quite expensive beds to fund-
Mm
... but we are committed to doing that.
So not only have we funded more beds in Budget '25,
continued to fund more beds in Budget '26, myself and
Mark Mitchell, our Minister for Corrections, have got an active piece of
work underway with both Corrections,
and Health to look at how we better manage that
wait list to ensure we've got the right prison
in-reach services, as well as court liaison as well, and
ensuring that we do build out beds in our forensic services.
So just finally, can I just confirm that Budget 2026,
the Mason Clinic tag contingency, which we can't
see the amount-
Mm
... is for enabling work?
Yes. So that is CapEx.
Not for new beds.
And then we've got... It will be for new beds, and then we've got $36
million in OpEx. And I just see if Dale or Audrey
want to add anything to that in the detail of that.
No.
Nothing. That's right.
Okay.
Watch this space.
Sure.
Just a supplementary to that. Thank you all for being here.
We of course, want to
do some prevention before it gets to that
level of care. Can you point to where in the budget
you have got initiatives and programs around the
prevention of people getting to that forensic mental health
level?
You'll have to probably explain what you mean by that.
So-
Are you talking about in-prison mental health support?
Yes.
If you're talking about mental health support in prison-
Mm-hmm
... that's a budget that Mark Mitchell holds.
So I'm talking about before they get to the prison
system. So, that prevention funding for mental
health,
can you point to where in the budget you are
focusing on the prevention-
Yeah
... getting there.
So if I start at a high level and step through it, and then you
can ask me follow-up questions if I haven't got specifically to your point.
When we came into office, the mental health and addiction ring-fence
was 2.4 billion.
Mm-hmm.
After the increase in uplift with Budget '26, that
will go close to 3 billion.
Part of my mental health target, setting New Zealand's first mental health
targets, three of them are around access, one workforce,
and one prevention and early intervention.
So we have set a target that 25% of the mental
health and addiction ring-fence goes into prevention and early
intervention. Some might say, "Well, I work in a specialist
service," which is part of your question, I think, "In the community
with adults. How can I be seen as prevention and early intervention?"
But actually, when you take a philosophical approach is actually even at a
specialist level, by intervening a lot earlier-
Mm-hmm
... and ensuring that we engage people potentially with
lifelong enduring mental health issues, then we can keep them
stable. They can better support themselves with their mental
health issues and stay out of the criminal justice system.
Court liaisons is a good example of a program like that.
Yeah. Can I have one more supplementary?
One more supplementary.
Thank you.
No.
Thank you, Minister. And yes, we
are really pleased to see that increased
funding in the vote.
When we are looking at
prevention, can you tell
us
how much of that is going to be in different areas?
So for example, with prevention, how much will be
in youth or with seniors or in
men's mental health?
Yeah. That would probably take some considerable work
to get into a-
Postcare impression
... health system across the country-
Yeah
... that spends $3 billion, how you would tag that for
either male Versus
female because, of course, when you look at the investment
into our primary care mental health services, it's actually
universal, so we wouldn't measure it by that.
But your point is valid about young people.
That's why we do have specific young people's programs within
primary care. It's why we do resource programs like
Gumboot Friday to ensure that we have available,
appropriate youth mental health
support. But in fairness, if you look at the
report released yesterday by the Mental Health and Wellbeing Commission-
Mm
... that talked about still the pressures of access around
young people. What's really interesting in that, when you look at the Ministry of
Youth Development survey, only
3.7% of young people said they couldn't
access support because there wasn't an available appointment.
Only 3.7. In fact, over a third reported they didn't
know where to go, or they were too embarrassed to ask for help.
So it shows we've still got to push through barriers of stigma and discrimination.
I get a good overview of our mental health system.
There is still capacity in our youth services, but what it says to
me, it's the type of services they might perceive as medicalized or adult,
and we do need more youth specific mental health services that are more
engaging for our young people.
Go to your primary? Yes, please. Thank you.
It just follows on very nicely from this.
So just recently, the new UNICEF statistics came
out. It's a- I'll come to you next, Carmel ...
out of 37 countries, and
New Zealand was ranked 37 out of 37 for youth mental
wellbeing.
And I know that there has been that increase in funding.
Can you tell us how much of that will go towards a YOSS, the
Youth One-Stop Shops?
We know that there was-- We were both at the opening of the new
event center at the wonderful Christchurch Youth Hub, and
we know that there has been work done across Parliament
under one umbrella.
And there's recommendations in there around how to best support our
young people with-
Yes
... these YOSSES.
Can you tell us
what is being done in this budget, further to what you've just
outlined, around
picking up these tamariki who might have had
support but aren't getting the further support that they're actually
needing,
so that they're not...
Yeah. We just want to look after our young people-
Yeah. No, that's a-
... and those Youth One-Stop Shops
... valid question.
Yeah.
There's a lot to do in that space, and I acknowledge it's an area that
we've got to work collectively
on. And what I would raise is that I'm a big supporter of the YOSS model.
Mm-hmm.
And actively, at the moment, through a policy lens, we're going through
an evaluation of Youth One-Stop Shop.
My hope that will inform future funding
decisions around how we can grow that model as well.
You asked for specific questions.
I'd refer to the recent investment out of the Hauora Māori
Appropriation, where we're significantly investing into youth
crisis support-
Mm
... especially in the Northland area, new kaimahi roles based
after a coroner's recommendations.
But I would say also is that when we look at young people in the sense of
teenage years, we quite often say: What can we do in early
intervention and prevention at that age?
What we do know is we actually need to get into those young people and their
families-
Mm-hmm
... in the first 2,000 days, if we're really true to prevention and early
intervention. So that's why we've announced the $20 million
out of budget 2026 to look at how we scale up
not only our specialist maternal mental health services,
our peer support lived experience, but also more prevention
through community and NGO services, and a significant
funding into the new bereavement pathway to support those parents who
have sadly been bereaved by maybe loss.
Thank you, Minister. I've just got two supplementaries.
That's all right.
One around the YOSSES, and then one,
jumping to the pre and perinatal mental health,
because you spoke about it there. So
with the Youth One-Stop Shops, we're hearing
around the country that
they've got the teams there for work readiness.
So the funding is tagged to work readiness, but
that there is a lack of funding for counseling
for the need that is being shown there, and that there isn't sort of
a streamline that goes from a YOSS in
Rotorua compared to Christchurch.
So
with the readiness teams, it seems like those are well-funded, but
it's the counselors that they are saying to
us don't have enough funding. So within that $20
million,
how will that be allocated? Work readiness, it's great.
We want young people to be-
Yes
... out there doing these things. But the counseling is where,
at the Youth One-Stop Shops-
Yes
... is also important.
Yeah, look, I can't announce any funding for Youth One-Stop Shops
today. But around the pressure of youth counseling, what I'd
also point out too is actually there is capacity within
the Gumboot Friday contract of seeing 15,000 young people a year.
And when you look at the Youth Access and Choice program, there is definitely
capacity within that. So that's part of joining up the system, so
when people do have demand that they can't sustain, that they look
to available services to support those young people in a time of need.
Thank you, Minister. And just one more supplementary with the- No, that's all
right ... the prenatal
health. And thank you for-
For looking at that and putting budget or vote
into the pre- and postnatal health for the first
2,000 days of-
... tamaiti and whānau's lives. Because what we're hearing is
that there are touchpoints throughout,
say, a pregnant parent's life and a
pregnant parent's pregnancy, and that
they are not getting the care, and then they're getting to
crisis level.
Mm. Yes.
And then that is when all of the services come around.
So what is going to be happening in those
first touchpoints where people aren't getting to
crisis level, and having to be put into
institutionalized-
Yeah
... with a newborn-
... which isn't ideal, obviously.
No, that's right, and that's why we do want to invest more into prevention and
early intervention, specifically in the first 2,000 days.
So it's not only bolstering our specialist services so
mums and dads will have more timely access, so they don't have to
wait till they get in crisis. But also, within that, there is
a million-dollar community fund to support our community and
NGO and iwi providers
as well. So we're ensuring that we do build out along that continuum.
Because we do know the more resource we can get upstream, then
we can prevent people needing crisis services, but more
expensive crisis services.
Mm.
So it's better for the taxpayer and actually better for the individual themselves.
All right.
Minister.
Thank you. We've got primaries from Carlos, and then back to Casey.
Thank you. Thank you, Chair. Minister,
last year as mental health packages, we actually spent a lot of funding
to operate, or at least open at least six crisis
recovery cafe.
Mm.
So how is it work? Can you give us a little bit update, how many people have been
using the services, and what is your future plan
on this initiative?
Yeah, it's part of the mental health plan that not only do we want
faster access to support-
Mm
... but more frontline workers and a better crisis response.
What we do know with the use of our peer support lived experience
workforce,
that's a workforce that's ready to go.
Mm.
We can stand them up quite quickly.
And it's a workforce that shows it gets real results.
When I open the new peer support lived experience service in Wellington
ED, one of their workers said
it was quite timely that she was now there as a worker
because she had been to ED herself in a time of
crisis. I think the ability to have someone alongside of you who's
been there before-
Mm
... will make a real difference. Not only that, when you think about the peers in
ED and also the crisis recovery cafes that are peer
led as well. We're rolling out peer support
lived experience workers and eating disorder services now in
maternal mental health service as well. They'll be all joined up.
What we do know with the crisis recovery cafes, quite often
they are going to pick people up from ED.
If you think about it, when you're in a crisis, the last place you want is a
brightly lit, noisy place with a lot of people.
And so what they are getting in a crisis recovery cafe is a
non-clinical service, something that is more
suited to their needs, getting the support they need, and I think that'll be a real
game changer.
Mm. So I'll be expecting more crisis response
cafe being open in the next 12 months?
Yes, very much so. Recently been down in Christchurch, where we
opened the first crisis recovery cafe there.
Dunedin after that, and we're looking to roll them out across the
country.
Thank you.
Tracey then Jenny.
Facilities, and let's start with Hillmorton,
something we're both familiar with.
And for
some time we've been hearing about the plight of staff at
Hillmorton.
The new facility is now not expected to open until late
2027,
I believe, but correct me if I'm wrong.
Will all of the 80 beds be staffed and funded
from day one?
Yeah, we'll look to transition into that.
If you look at the experience of Palmerston North,
even the Mason Clinic,
it does take time
to transfer patients. Of course, when you think about the models
of care,
for the staff, it's ensure that they are prepared, and
they go through training for a new facility as well.
So for me, it's not necessarily the speed we do
something. It is the safety we do that as well.
Of course, we will need beds open that match the number of
patients that will transfer into that,
and we're committed to ensuring that we have a better
level of facilities. I do want to acknowledge the
last Labor government that started off that significant
investment into new mental health facilities as well.
They are quite literally, I think, a game changer when you think
of the very tired state that people
in mental health inpatient facilities had to endure-
Mm
... when they were there to get well.
Mm.
And thankfully now they go to new facilities that are
therapeutic.
So we're really committed to that.
We know there's real pressure across system, but ensuring that
we get the right beds in the right place.
Okay. So in regards then to the other builds,
are there any other builds or upgrades
that have also been delayed? And have you got any
indication via this budget 2026 process
about when
those kind of opening dates will be?
Yeah, none that I'm aware of, but I'll open it up whether Dale
or Phil Bridge got anything to offer there
No. Not aware of any
So you're not aware of any other delays?
Mm-hmm.
Okay.
You also-- We haven't really touched on addiction
services,
and the three-week
referral date. You know, the-
Yes
... to be seen within-
Three-week target, yes
... three-week target.
Yes.
So at the moment, only around about three quarters, I see, of addiction
referrals are being seen within that three-week timeframe,
which can be worse than other mental health referrals.
So what in Budget 2026 do
you think is going to address that gap?
Yeah. Well, sometimes it's not actually more money.
Mm.
And one of the reasons I set the first mental health and addiction
targets in New Zealand was to have, A, an expected level of
service that I thought Kiwis wanted from their mental health and addiction
service, but also that and a level of accountability.
And the reality is now that the level of discussions that we're having with
executive regional directors responsible for each of the four
regions around the mental health targets, I even met with them
on Monday, is now we can push into the 20 health
districts. We can look at data, Māori, Pasifika, Asian,
rural and urban, and age groups. So yes, our
expected level of service is 80%. Nationally for
one week, we are at 84%, and specialists are
82. But I've always been very clear I'm not happy with the national average.
And when you look at the 20 health districts, there is variation, and
you are quite rightly pointing out the variation for addictions as well.
Mm.
So part of the responsibility now for the executive regional directors
is quarterly they prepare action plans and improvement
plans that show how quarter on quarter they are going to
increase the wait time so they meet those targets, and that's what I'm
holding Health New Zealand to account for.
And you're still quite satisfied with wait times being the way to
operationalize effectiveness and efficiency?
Well, I'm no target fundamentalist.
Mm.
But actually what it does is put a line in the sand-
Mm
... that allows me to have a conversation with executive regional
directors to say, "If you look at an area where at the moment,
Capital Coast,
how are you going to improve to ensure you get the targets?"
So for us, under this government, it's about pushing back local
decision-making to the front line around service delivery-
Mm
... budgets and workforce. And I think it's actually going to be a real
game changer around postcode lottery because for the first time,
we can drill into specific communities and measure them
against a national standard. Then my expectation is Health New
Zealand works with not only their own services but NGO and
community and iwi services to ensure there's services there that
speeds up that access to that national standard.
Mm-hmm.
Shane.
Thank you, Minister. My question's around what's happening
in the rural communities in terms of mental health support.
Can you give us
an overview of the work you've been doing
in that area in light of we've just come off the back of field days,
and some of us may have gone to the Rural Support Trust evening
event, which was raising money, but also
showcasing or highlighting a particularly grim story from
a woman and her family and the impacts of suicide.
Yes, very much so. And we do know the pressures and need on our rural
community-
Mm
... and our farming community specifically-
Absolutely
... and the pressures faced on farm as well.
And like you, just to acknowledge the great work of our Rural Support
Trust. Quite often
volunteers, and that's why the government was keen to
commit $3 million to support Rural Support Trust.
They can do great navigation work into our primary
and specialist services. And the good thing, just following on from that last
discussion, is having the targets and the ability to
pull out rurality and urban. That's the first time under the
geographical classification of health, the GCH, we can do that.
Which allows us in districts and regions to look at performance for
rural communities that isn't masked by better performing urban
areas as well. And that'll be a game changer.
But what's quite interesting is rural and Māori
quite often outperform other areas in those targets as
well. So sometimes it does challenge to say- ...
"Absolutely, we're doing a good job in some areas." And when I talk to executive
regional directors, they can learn from each other-
Mm-hmm
... about their areas that are performing well, and also the areas
that are not performing as well. But there is real challenges when you think about
the geographical isolation-
Mm
... that people do experience on farm.
And that's why the question before about, do you stand by your targets
around efficiency in the best way?
Well, the reason I think they are a good way of delivering
performance is it's not for me to get on the shop floor.
But by setting a clear guidance and expectation,
when I go around the country, especially in rural communities,
they're talking about things like telepsychiatry, singular
intake systems. So they can come up with their solutions
about how they ensure people in their communities get that care.
Might be a hybrid in person online or more online through
Starlink. So it's great innovation out there.
Right. Just final-
Final
... final. You mentioned in the budget $28 million
for 150
FTE relating to a new role called psychology
assistant. Can you just give us a brief look at what that
role is and what will they do, and is it a graduate role through the education
role?
Yeah. Look, we're really excited.
The problem definition in New Zealand is that the reason why
we weren't keeping up with workforce is, A, we didn't have a plan.
Mm.
So we published New Zealand's first mental health and addiction workforce plan in
our first year in 2024 and tagged $44 million to
it as well.
We've also committed to doubling the amount of clinical psychologists
in their internship training, taking it from 40 to 80.
We're currently sitting at 74 against a target of 70.
And also increasing psychiatry by 50%, taking
first year intake from 33 to 48. But what the
data showed is that psychology is one of the most studied
courses at university. But when people weren't getting one of
those
clinical psychology internships, they were disappearing from the field.
Right.
So we created a one-year postgraduate,
and AUT and University of Canterbury will be the first to
open in the start of July. We also know there's considerable
interest from other universities.
And that's why we thought it was only right for those students going
into class in July, that we give them a commitment
that there is fully funded roles there
for psychology assistant, scaling up to 150.
So when they graduate, they are going in.
Also, I want to be clear because there was some criticism that
we thought we were going to cannibalize clinical
psychology roles within Health New Zealand to fund these, and that's why
Budget '26 commitment shows we're sustaining clinical
psychology funding, if not increasing it, and then new funding for
psychology assistants.
Thank you, Minister. We are at time.
Appreciate everyone-
Thank you very much.
Thanks, mate.